devlog

Day 1. June 23 2026;
-------------------

Starting with following cstack's classic "Let's Build a Simple Database" at
https://cstack.github.io/db_tutorial/, but in Zig instead of C and with the
intent of following TigerStyle and making any different design decisions that
were required in the process.

I expected to cruise through things, but most of my time was spent reading the
TigerBeetle codebase for examples of how they handled allocation and assertions.
Ironically, creating the simple REPL harness felt the least comfortable because
it wasn't fully clear what assertions were even needed. Design by Contract style
assertions seem pretty clear when implementing a data structure or mid-layer API
or a module boundary. The REPL and StaticAllocator were just thin control flow
wrappers around IO calls and a trivial state machine that is entirely linear.
So most assertions seemed trivial. Even in the TigerBeetle codebase they skimped
on assertions in the same areas.

It felt "wrong" to start the experiment immediately making exceptions, even if
well reasoned.

Anyway, spent maybe 4 hours and the code is...just a simple repl. The research
was worth it though. I'm just aware that I could have burnt through half the
tutorial if just writing my usual style and not having to research.

I'll throw this all out anyway. For something like this I personally need to do
some exploratory programming to get a sense of the design I even want. But I'll
be entirely rewriting it when I know what I want to build. That way I can apply
TigerStyle's design-heavy approach faithfully.

Day 2. June 30 2026;
-------------------

Usually I keep things in 1 file until it gets unwieldy. But I realized splitting
things up early makes git history clearer. With this I'm making my first real
deviation from TigerStyle: using Zig's `CamelCase.zig` convention for file
structs meant to be used as a type. Their rationale is clear and fair. But I
prefer the clarity over uniformity. It wouldn't bother me in a collaborative
repo, but I'll exercise my preference here.

I'm using Zig's std ascii module for prototyping convenience. The first time I
throw everything away and rewrite things, it's worth pulling in a proper unicode
library. Or really commiting and writing things myself but there's alot in the
firehose and I gotta scope what I'm focusing on learning somewhere. At least
until I can justify the rabbithole.

It's annoying that Zig can't assert that something isn't undefined. That'd be
really convenient for Statement.prepare and probably tons of other places.
